sometimes you really do have to brave
the elements to enjoy the delights of
the British coastline but have you ever
stopped to think what's beside us when
we're beside the sea let's take a look
yeah well it looks to be pretty empty
in fact hidden in the sea is a vast rich
world a dominant force a life on earth
and essential for our planet and our own
survival
[Music]
plankton these tiny creatures virtually
invisible to us are an entire universe
of astonishing life-forms and all life
on the planet depends on plankton
provide 50% of the oxygen we breathe
and we're now realizing that they may
play an even more important role
throughout the ocean fish are
disappearing from our seas the cod and
haddock we scoff with chips are
plummeting now new techniques and
cameras are allowing us to solve one
part of the mystery
[Music]
- a tighly plankton swimming through the
sea is like wading through treacle as
they swim they leave a wake behind
[Music]
like footprints in the snow
larger fish use these wakes to home in
on their dinner but in some places the
seas appear to be getting warmer and a
change of even one degree has an effect
on these plankton the warmer water is
thinner and the trails don't last as
long that makes it harder for the fish
to catch their prey and by looking into
this microscopic world we've discovered
something else in the warmer water a
different type of plankton is thriving
one which is faster much faster these
super fast plankton can move 500 body
lengths per second which is like us
traveling at nearly 2,000 miles an hour
which is bad news for the fish that feed
on them
fish like the cod and haddock that are
plummeting looking into the vital
microscopic world has discovered one
answer to the mystery and shown us how
important it is never to lose sight of
the smaller picture
you